Good afternoon everyone,
my name is Travis brown,
I'm the graphics and imaging evangelist
and it's my pleasure to welcome you
to Vertex Programming with OpenGL,
session 205.
And sort of the theme that we
have at this year's WWC is the
aspect of leveraging the GPU.
And in the graphics and imaging
overview yesterday we showed a lot
of examples of using programmability
to do interesting things,
interesting visual effects.
Those were fragment programs,
but there's also sort of a companion
technology or another way to program
the GPU called Vertex Programming.
Which instead of touching
fragments and therefore pixels,
it's actually going to be
using the GPU to do very high
speed geometry calculations.
And the two go hand in hand in
terms of the ways you can really
offload the burden of doing the
graphics from the CPU and allow
the GPU to do what it does best.
Which is work with geometry and
then obviously draw that geometry.
So, let's get started.
So, it's my pleasure to
welcome our speaker today,
Michael Larsen up to the stage so he
can take you through the presentation.
Thanks Travis.
Today we're here to talk about
Vertex Programming with OpenGL.
It's been around for a couple years,
starting with the ATI RV200
in that generation.
So we'll talk about it a little bit.
Let's start out,
we're going to go through an
introduction to Vertex Programs.
We're going to talk about Vertex
Programs in the OpenGL pipeline,
the computation model used
by the Vertex Programs,
the program syntax for
the RVertex Program,
and go through a number of examples,
starting from simple ones using Shader
Builder and some more complicated
ones using the Project Builder.
So starting out, why use Vertex Programs?
Say you're using fragment programs,
a lot of the inputs that go
into a fragment program come
out of the vertex program.
You might have texture coordinates,
you might have some varying position
coordinates that come through,
or just in general,
you'll probably end up using
vertex programs if you're
using fragment programs.
Say your application doesn't fit into
the standard OpenGL lighting pipeline,
you've got an existing lighting
model that you want to implement in
Vertex Programs and you don't want
to change that to the OpenGL one,
you can use a Vertex Program for that.
Say your application is
pre-processing vertex arrays,
or every time you draw an object,
you're touching the data.
One way to get rid of that,
touching the data,
and see-view time is actually
moving up to the vertex program,
isolate that part of your program that
actually does that and move it up.
Examples would be surfaces
and vertex tweening.
in between is from keyframe animation.
It's an old term.
You know,
you have the general cartoonists and the
people who drew everything in between,
so it's called tweening.
So the benefits of vertex programs,
essentially you're going to be offloading
functionality from the CPU to the GPU.
You have more flexible per
vertex geometric operations,
higher performance,
and lower memory usage.
So let's talk about Vertex
Programs and the OpenGL pipeline.
So here's the old fixed model.
You start out with the OpenGL vertices.
You have your standard model
view of transformation,
the color materials and
the lighting effects,
and your perspective division.
and that's been replaced
with Vertex Programs.
Essentially,
your Vertex Program replaces a lot
of the same functionality that was "a
fixed functionality". A lot of that
was actually implemented in microcode.
You're just essentially allowing
you to use that as microcode.
The SGI machines for years used
microcode for all these transforms.
So what changes?
Your program,
if you're using Vertex Program,
you're now responsible for
doing all the transformation,
the color materials and lighting,
and a whole slew of other
issues if you're using the
OpenGL Color Lighting Model.
And if you're using them
and you disable them,
Here's a scenario.
Say you're switching out of Vertex
Program and you're expecting the standard
OpenGL lighting model to be there.
You have to disable them or
you'll get everything run through
the Vertex Program regardless.
So let's talk about
the computation model.
So what invokes a vertex program?
Well, there's a number of standard
methods to find the ARB spec.
Say that you're issuing
a GL vertex command,
which usually kicks off some
kind of operation indirectly
through OpenGL vertex draw
elements or draw arrays commands.
The current raster position is changed.
and essentially a vertex
program terminates at the end of
reaching the end of the program.
The computation model is you have
independent execution on each vertex.
There can be, and there likely are, two,
four vertex units in each GPU.
temporary data so from when you
write a program you kind of feel
there's going to be data left over but
verdicts program you run the program,
you're done it's all gone
So, the input/output model,
you have your Vertex Program,
You have Vertex Data Inputs,
which be your position, color, textures,
coordinates, and those kinds of values.
Environment parameters.
OpenGL State.
Let me talk about
Environment Parameters real quick.
Environment Parameters are values
that you can load up to your Vertex
Program through GL or across all
Vertex Programs or for a single one.
And OpenGL State information which is
the current lighting model and a number
of matrices available from OpenGL.
In addition,
you have a number of temporary registers.
available for use while you're
executing the Vertex Program.
And then once your program completes
computation for each value,
say the color, the position,
and everything else,
you spit it to the Vertex data output.
And once you reach the
end of the Vertex Program,
you spit out everything
to your output registers,
you hit an end,
Vertex Program stops and it kicks
it off to the rest of the engine.
What's available to Vertex Programs?
Standard attributes, position, color,
textures, coordinates,
and additional programmable
attributes that you can set.
OpenGL Transformer Lighting State.
So the parameter information
is read only by the program.
It's defined in the spec.
Essentially constant values from the
from the sense of the program.
From outside you can program them up
using environment commands from OpenGL.
There's two types.
There's global parameters,
which say you have
multiple vertex programs,
you can load up these environment
parameters across all vertex programs.
Or you have local parameters,
which only affect the current
vertex program running.
The instruction set is limited
to about 27 instructions.
They're focused on transformer lighting.
Remember,
this is kind of like a microcode
implementation exposed out,
so they're very limited.
There's no loops, no branches.
You have limited program length.
Some instructions are macros,
which means you have instructions
that are complicated that might do
multiple things in one operation.
They might actually be two instructions,
or two or three instructions,
and they are defined by the spec.
So not all instructions will
require two instructions or more.
There's data operands.
There's scalar operands,
which are standard floating point values,
and SIMD operations,
which are AlteVec-type values,
for floating point values indexed by X,
Y, Z, and W.
[Transcript missing]
So data component selection,
you have a normal SIMD operation
like an AlteVec instruction.
A equals B.
You've got some input parameter,
goes through some operation,
gets flushed out at the bottom,
and they all get set.
You have a Swizzle SIMD selection
which allows you to move
data between components.
So it's on the input select,
it's not on the output select.
So if you have a two source component,
you might have source A might be
XYZ and source B might be ZZZ.
You can select them all at the same one.
You have a scalar mass operation,
which is,
these are the scalar operations.
You can select which source operation,
or source component you
want for the operation.
So if you're doing like a
reciprocal divide and you want
to see the reciprocal of y,
you essentially select y.
The instruction set has a number of
standard scalar and SIMD instructions,
like you see in AlteVec.
You have your standard add, subtract,
multiply and add.
Multiply and add is a very
important instruction.
It's not a macro, it's a one instruction.
You can do a lot with multiple adds and
you'll see in the examples I'll show you.
You have absolute value,
minimum and maximum, dot product,
disinfectors, so real lighting.
You can see the lighting in
here and reciprocal functions.
Math functions are pretty limited.
You have the exponent base two,
floor fraction and log base two.
And then the more complex
instructions you have:
component selection, lighting,
conditional set on compare,
doesn't operate like you think it does,
but I'll show you how it works,
and indirect registers
load from parameter space.
So you can't modify your
temporary registers,
you can't index them
through indirect addressing,
only parameters can be indirect values.
So, let's look at the constraints.
These are the base requirements for
all Vertex Program Implementations.
So, if you write a Vertex Program,
the base implementation
will have this many values.
It has 96 Program Environments,
96 Local Values, 8 Program Matrices,
1 Address Register,
128 instructions and twelve temporary
registers now spec allows for anything
more than that but you do the base
requirements that you can you can you
can look look to have all implementations
So how do you find out what your
new piece of hardware has to you,
R300 or whatever you put in there?
using GLProgramArb and query
the interface and what's there.
There's a whole bunch of anumes that you
can ask for and see what's out there.
So let's talk about syntax.
All programs must start with the version
signature of our Vertex Program 1.0.
Must terminate with an end statement.
and just about anything
in between is okay.
It has loose temporary and
parameter variable definitions.
You don't have to find
all your temps at top.
You can define them in
line just as long as,
you know, before you use them,
just like C++.
So, what is a syntax?
It's effectively a
GPU independent assembly language.
It's not targeting any specific GPU,
it's independent of all types.
It's not C, and it's not pure assembly.
There's no fixed registry allocation.
It's independent.
Like I said, it's GPU independent.
They're loaded as strings,
they're runtime compiled by the driver,
ATI, Nvidia, whoever,
and there's no fixed
allocation of GPU registers.
Three kinds of parameters.
You have the constant parameters,
which are not programmable
from your program.
You have the environment parameters,
which are programmable
across all Vertex programs.
And you have local parameters,
which are specific to the
currently bound Vertex program.
You have temporary registers,
essentially they start out with a
temp and you can name off up to 12.
You'd be surprised how few
you actually have to use.
The key thing about using temporary
registers is you get a mindset from
AlteVec or whatever you're used
to programming on of creating a
whole bunch of data and then having
a result and storing them away.
The key thing about using the temporary
registers for Vertex programs is
compute your result and stick it
in the result as fast as you can
and reuse that temporary register.
Then a number of urinary, binary,
and ternary instructions.
You know, reciprocals and maths
and adds and multiplies,
those things.
So, just to look at the
instruction set real quick,
this comes out of the ARB spec.
You see the instruction,
you have a defined set of inputs,
everything, just pretty much everything
takes a vector input.
Might have two sources.
The output, that's the important part
by looking at the spec,
is you might have,
it might be a scalar function
or it might be a vector,
a SIMD operation.
You can see the flavor of the
instructions and the syntax that's used.
and more additional instructions.
You can look at some
of the math functions,
the power, the reciprocal,
the reciprocal square root.
All those instructions
are scalar outputs.
So you have to select a particular,
if you want a square root of some value,
like a square root of the y value,
it's going to be spread
across all the outputs.
And that's what it shows in this example.
So, where do you get more information
on our Vertex programs?
Well, the shader builder and the
development tools comes for free,
and it's a great place to start.
It has active syntax checking.
You don't have to build a framework
and build a program to make it work.
You can just turn it on,
start dialing away, and things work.
So let's talk about loading programs
and controlling the execution
environment for Vertex programs.
So,
Vertex programs are loaded as strings.
Like I said,
they're runtime compiled by the driver.
Essentially,
there's only one way to do it today.
They've left ways to do it
different ways in the future,
but strings are the only way today.
It has active syntax checking.
So,
after you try a load of Vertex Program,
you can test the GL_GET error,
and if you call a
GL_GET string with its new,
it'll actually come back with a string
reporting the actual position in
the code where the error was found.
which is very useful.
You'll find out.
So loading, like I said,
there's parameters.
You have environment parameters.
There's a specific call for
loading environment parameters.
It's Program A and B parameter.
And they're all loaded up SIMD values.
There's no way to load a scalar value.
Everything gets loaded as SIMD.
Also, there's an equivalent
call for local parameters,
you know, GL, local parameters,
and they also get loaded as SIMD.
So let's go through a
basic Vertex Program.
Michael Kors: What it's going to do,
it's effectively the
shader build example,
maybe a little bit simplified.
We're going to do a model view
perspective transform of an input vertex
and set the result and move it on.
So here we have Shader Builder.
Let me bring it up a little bit.
Let's look around here a little bit.
You have essentially
your code input here.
This is actually loaded
as a vertex program.
You have to load it before
any begin end statement,
by the way.
You can't change it
while doing a begin end.
Even, well, you know,
draw arrays and draw elements
have implied begin ends,
but effectively before a begin statement,
you have to have this
loaded as a program.
So let's go through this again.
You have your editor
interface right here.
You can enable/disable
the Vertex Program.
You have a number of objects
available to draw your test
your vertex program out on.
You have a sphere, teapot, a hedron,
plane, I think it's actually called that,
I don't know.
- Everybody draws teapots.
And you have your GL parameters.
And you can dial up your color,
you can change the color on the fly,
go to
uh... you can also select uh... a
number texture units available for
input uh... you can load them up and
select them through this interface but
today we're just going to use uh...
Texturing unit zero.
And you can enable it or disable it.
Turns things on.
So.
Then over here you have a
bunch of debugging information.
I'm not going to go through it.
It essentially allows you to
step through a Vertex Program and
watch the values change.
In addition,
ShaderBuilder has an instruction
reference that comes up over here.
So you're not digging
around the ARB spec.
It's 64 pages long and
it's really detailed.
You don't want to read it.
Read it when you get there, you know,
okay.
But you can essentially have online
documentation of all the instructions
and what they're supposed to do.
So let's go back.
Turn that off.
Start the program out,
the R Vertex Program 1.0.
I have an offset, a scale,
and a zero value.
This is a constant thrown in here.
Once you program enough,
you start throwing in your
standard cut and paste,
and I have a whole bunch of
standard values I use all the time.
Here's a temporary value,
the vertex position.
Let's show you an example
of the runtime compile.
"Inline error checking"
comes up with an error saying
there's something wrong here.
If you look at the bottom it says line 9.
Actually if you did the DL error check
and actually pulled that string out
like I showed in the previous example,
it would return this same value.
So as you work into project
builder examples and you
start doing it by yourself,
just about all your Vertex
programs will pull that string
out just to help you out.
So, let's start out.
Right here I'm just adding a,
here's the vertex position right here.
That's an input value that
comes from the program.
Here's a temporary called
VFOS and a zero value.
So I can inline actually add an offset.
and actually automatically
adds it to the program.
I can change that offset real time.
These are great tools, by the way.
You know,
one thing I do a lot is I actually
get a program up and running here,
cut and paste it, stick it in a file,
and add it to my project builder.
And then once I,
if I develop errors in the program,
I always come back and paste it in here,
see where the error's at.
And right here,
so I'm taking the vertex position,
the vertex from the input,
assigning it to a temporary
by doing an add of an offset,
and then multiplying by some scale value.
And you can comment all this stuff out.
[Transcript missing]
and then also set the text coordinate.
So that's an example of a basic
Vertex Program within Shader Builder.
It's pretty simple,
it's probably 10 instructions,
five instructions long.
So, let's go back.
So we're going to go through next,
we're going to go through
lighting vertex program,
that's another major use
for vertex programs for,
like I said, if you don't have a standard
GL lighting model that you want to use.
What we're going to do is we're
going to use Shader Builder.
It's essentially the same
example that comes out of
your development example area.
We're going to model view the
transform of an input vertex,
perform some lighting computations,
and then move on.
Let's do the demo.
A little more complex.
So I wanted to remove some functionality
here before I moved on too much.
I'll leave that over there.
So you can look at this in stages,
this thing being applied in stages.
A Trib, you know,
effectively it's a pound to find.
I mean, it really is.
So if you want to use nice
names for standard input values,
you can call them a Tribs.
You have, now I have two parameters here,
and if you notice,
in this parameter right here,
I'm sharing a whole bunch of values,
rather than creating
multiple parameter variables,
I'm jamming four scalar values,
three scalar values into one SIMD value.
- This is a parameter space.
And here's your light position.
So what we go through here,
we do our Model-Viewed
Perspective Transform.
We start computing the lighting value.
[Transcript missing]
The nice thing about this tool
is you can do things right in
line and test them as you go.
Say you develop a bug through here,
you can comment it out real time
and actually see what part of the
program is actually messing up.
and then we go through and
we move the result to the
output position and the color.
So those are two simple
examples of how to use vertex
programs in the Shader Builder.
We're not going to talk about
Shader Builder too much.
We're going to move on to some new ideas.
So as far as Shader Builder goes,
it's a great place to start.
It's a great tool.
You load up textures,
you don't have to build a framework.
You can get started today.
It also provides active syntax checking
of your vertex program as they develop.
In addition, as you start out,
it has online instruction information.
So, as far as program possibilities,
you know, a lot of people
You look at the instruction set,
it's rather small, lighting focused.
The code space is pretty small,
we're all used to having
as much code as we want to.
And the number of temporary
registers is actually pretty small.
But you'd be surprised what
you can actually do with that.
You can do surfaces,
you can do active displacements,
you can do real-time displacements,
you can do advanced lighting effects,
keyframe animation,
and visual computation.
So let's go through some real quick
tips from an application standpoint.
Best way to use Vertex Programs is
using Vertex Arrays combined
with Vertex Array Ranges.
Key thing about this is you're moving
all the CPU from the issuing and
fetching of all the Vertex Arrays.
So you're keeping the
CPU out of the equation.
Use compound selection
to save parameter space.
Rather having multiple
parameters defined,
like one, two,
the runtime compiler is not going
to be able to figure this out.
Stick them together.
In addition, use compound parameters.
Save yourself reciprocal multiply.
Save it by actually pre-computing
these fixed values and
combining them in one array.
So here I have factorial 6, 720,
negative 720, the inverse of that and
the negative of that.
Additional programming tips,
these are things I've had
to figure out how they went.
Only one value for some
instructions can be selected.
At some point,
you might want to merge all of those
values back into the same vector,
or SIMD value and start computing
again rather than generating
a single scalar value and then
doing a whole bunch of work on it,
generating another SIMD scalar value
doing a whole bunch of work on it.
You might want to merge all
back together and compute them
like you would using AlteVec.
You can use the select parameter
and multiply add instruction to
merge everything back together.
This shows how you're using -- you're
doing a reciprocal on three values,
and then you're starting to
merge them back together by doing
multiply add back into one value.
This actually is quite helpful.
Conditional selection.
There is no branches,
so how do you do conditional selection?
Well, the only way to really do
it is through multiplies.
So you have a value,
say you want to do if
A greater than or equal to B,
then assign C equals
A or something like that.
You have to do, you know,
set greater than equal,
which actually sets, it doesn't actually,
what it does, it sets the, if it's true,
it sets the output to ones.
So you're going to use that ones value
to multiply against the input value,
so it's either going to be one or zero,
and a MAT instruction in between
that merges the two together
like a conditional would.
So I've got it down to four instructions,
and there's no branches.
So let's talk about vertex
programs for surfaces.
So a lot of the lighting functionality
for vertex programs is actually
moved down to fragment programs.
You can get per-pixel lighting.
So what else can you do with this?
This is a pretty powerful
little tool you have here.
So rather than tweaking with
your vertices every time you want
to move somebody's position or
you want to define a new shape,
just use UV mesh,
essentially two-dimensional mesh that you
create once and you never touch it again.
So the vertex program is going to compute
the XYZ position of all the values.
You can be surprised
what you can do with it.
You can do quadratic surfaces,
implicit surfaces, parametric surfaces.
You can do bilinear interpolation,
Bezier, B-splines, and NURBS,
all with vertex programs.
So, what's a UV mesh?
Well, a UV mesh is a 2D mesh.
It's bounded by UNV.
UNV can be bounded between
any kind of fixed value.
A parametric surface,
such as base area surfaces, or nerves,
or B-splines, are bound between 0 and 1
implicitly for the whole surface.
So, why would you want to use a
vertex program for a surface?
Well, you have to define one mesh.
One mesh for all your objects.
And by using that,
you never have to touch
your vertices again,
you can load them up in VRAM,
and you'll never see them again.
You can animate surfaces
using control parameters.
We'll show an example of that.
And you're offloading the
work from the CPU to the GPU.
So, let's talk about an implicit
surface vertex program.
school math thingy picked it off a web
page uh... you know that's three sign
values I got a u and v for x and y,
sign of u and v for x and y and then
uh... four control parameters combined
uh... with u and v for the final z value
So we're going to build a
UV mesh as a vertex array,
and we're going to bound it
between negative pi and pi,
and have some number of steps in between.
So, and then we're going to fill in
the position with the UV mesh,
u and v.
I see Z is zero is actually right here.
The U and V are just input
parameters to the vertex program.
So we're going to create our program,
debug it through ShaderBuilder,
and load it as a program string.
Then we're going to load the
shape control parameters,
the A, B, C,
and D you've seen in the previous
equation as local parameters.
And then we're going to submit a
number of quad strips for drawing.
So here's our object in line format.
This is actually a two-dimensional
UV mesh being input and it's finely
tessellated and all the positions are
being computed by the Vertex Program.
Right here are our control parameters.
We can dial in anything we want,
change the shape,
So these are the A, Bs and Cs.
Everybody who sees this wants to go
out and do knots and stuff like that.
Good luck.
You do a lot of cool stuff.
So let's do a little demo here.
Now we're computing the shape on the fly.
It's been loaded once in the VRAM.
It's not coming across AGP at all.
Text recorders are being completed
by the vertex program this is
an opengl context right here i'm
pulling the input from a quicktime
and here's the volume indicated.
It's kind of fun.
Michael Kors: What's that example?
It's fun.
So what did you see there?
You've seen a vertex program that
computed the object shape and
color and the texture coordinates.
The control values, A, B, and C, D,
were fed up as control parameters.
So one SIMD value per frame was
loaded up and it computed everything
else based on that one value.
There's no sine function.
So how did I compute that?
I used a McLaren power series.
You can do a lookup,
but it's just about as much work
as doing McLaren because you're
going to do indirect address
register loads and all that stuff.
And then once I had the values computed,
I computed all three sine values at the
same time using an ultimate similar code.
So let's take a look at the program.
It's rather small up here.
You guys see that?
and the lights, maybe.
So there's an input parameter, ABCD,
four temporary values, not a whole lot.
So the surface is described by
two fixed UV values for X and Y,
and then the control parameters
for the shape are in the Z.
So I had to compute those on the vertex
program rather than stuffing the vertex
array every time with new values.
So that's about six instructions there.
That's the example of the syntax.
It's very assembly-like.
Then I'm cranking on and I'm
starting to compute the sign
values through a number of terms.
so if you notice i'm doing a
multiply and a mat instruction
and i'm continually moving on
Then we do a few more terms.
We set the output position.
So once I have the output position,
I jam it away, because I'm going to use
that temporary value again.
And then I set the texture
coordinates to some input value,
which is actually get time.
I jammed it in the EQ0123x value.
And then I add it to
the vertex coordinate,
and that value's been
normalized between 0 and 1.
And that's it.
So, where do you go from here?
Try doing waves.
Waves are actually pretty simple.
Very similar, use cosine functions.
You can have essentially
multiple emitters.
You think about things
bobbing up in the water,
you have three,
four of them bobbing in the water,
and for each point on your water,
you just simply compute how far you are
away from that cosine emitter and compute
your Z value on that and sum across
all the emitters in the whole thing.
There's a demo tomorrow that shows this.
It's pretty cool.
So let's go through NURBS.
Actually, I had bilinear surfaces,
B-splines,
and everything else figured out.
NURBS took a while to
figure out how to do them.
So why use a vertex program for NURBS?
Most people who use NURBS in OpenGL have
already figured out that NURBS is slow.
You have to do a multiply,
accumulate across a number of
control points and they've either
rolled their own NURBS evaluators.
You can store multiple patches as
a single vertex array and just load
up control points for each patch.
You can do automatic level of detail
based on how close the patch is
to the user or to the screen by
selecting multiple different UV meshes.
So, what's a NIRB?
Actually,
I was going through the airport,
and my book dropped out,
and a guy comes up and goes,
what's a NIRB?
And I got to about non-uniform rational,
and his eyes glazed over,
and he walked away.
So... Most people say that.
Nobody really understands NIRBs.
Actually, that's what it means.
So,
it's a surface defined by interpolating
a number of control points.
It's used a lot in CAD.
It's dominant in CAD for... Because it
can do sphericals and a number of things
you can't do with Bayes-Zier surfaces.
If you want more information on NIRBs,
I'm not going to explain
how they work here.
Go search for Introduction
to NIRBs on the web,
or Rogers has a pretty good book on it,
and it's very simple to read.
So, we're going to do an outline of how
to draw NURBS using a vertex program.
We're going to compute the
B-spline basis functions for
that particular NURB on the host.
It's a recursive evaluator.
That's the biggest problem
I had with figuring out how to
do it on the vertex shaders.
It's a recursive function.
There's no branches, there's no calls,
there's no jumps.
So it had to be computed on the host.
That's actually a pretty good
thing because you only compute it
once and you never use it again.
So, you're going to load the control
points as local program parameters.
And then you can do the same
thing for your position,
your normal, your texture coordinates.
They just get loaded
as control parameters.
They don't get loaded as a new mesh.
It's essentially just
control point parameters.
So you're only loading 16 points
for each parameter that you
want to load in this example.
This example is a 4x4 controlled mesh.
The position information is
interpolated by the Vertex Program.
A real simple example.
On the implementation side,
so you have four by four
control mesh,
if you don't know anything about nerves,
that means you're going
to have 16 control points,
16 basis functions per UV value,
and that's a lot of storage.
So what I do is I actually
post-multiply the basis functions
in terms of rows and columns on
the vertex program as I go along,
and that essentially reduces the
requirements down to eight floats.
So if you look at the little, you know,
formula right here, you see, you know,
the UV point is the sum of
your number of control points,
which is 16, and then you have two
sets of basis functions,
one for the rows and one for the columns.
Let's do a demo.
so we're here we are surface i put
a texture on it uh... just uh...
Here's a UV values coming in there.
It's actually quite a
few number of points.
It's 10,000 points.
It's 100 by 100 grid.
There's a number of the
control points right here.
You can grab the control points.
You can move the surface real time.
This is all being computed
on the Vertex Program.
It's been loaded as a UV mesh in VRAM.
It never goes across the
AGP bus more than once.
And you can do a lot
of fun things with it.
NURBS are actually a
very flexible surface.
[Transcript missing]
So, let's talk about what we've seen.
Mesh was 100 by 100, it's 10,000 points.
If you do the math,
just for the position only,
that's 96,000, 960,000 flops that the
host didn't have to do.
A full-screen application
running at 1280 by 1K,
75 frames per second, blah, blah, blah,
blah, is about a gigaflop,
just for the position only.
So if you want to add
textures and normals to that,
you can add on an entry
of three gigaflops.
And the GPUs can do it.
So let's talk about
the program real quick.
Hopefully you're not straining your eyes.
I have two inputs,
a U basis and a V basis.
There's four floating
point SIMD values there.
Bring them in through the
vertex position and the color.
And I have a number of control
points as program locals.
I didn't show them all,
there's a number of them.
16.
So here I am, I'm pre-computing,
post-multiplying the basis functions to
come up with the required basis functions
I need for each row-column combination.
So I multiply, post-multiply,
and then I start my multiply-accumulate
on all the control points
as I go along for each
For this example, it's a four by four,
so there's four rows,
so there's four sets of these things.
I go along continually computing
the new basis functions,
and I finally end up
with a final position.
Do a transform, I have a result position,
and then I start, then I just move the
texture coordinate along.
The texture was normalized
between zero and one,
so it fit across the whole surface.
so where do you go from
here pretty cool stuff
Michael Kahn: Well,
you can import the position and
normals and the color information,
texture information,
from a modeler program
directly into this.
You can design vertex programs
for different size meshes,
you know, 3x5s,
anything in that value if you look at
the number of instructions it takes,
once you figure out how it works,
you know that you're
bound to a certain size.
You can't interpolate
10x10 control measures.
There's not enough space in
the vertex program to do that.
Michael Kahn:
And then you can actually do,
I haven't figured out how,
but I know I can do it,
subdivision surfaces.
Subdivision surfaces,
people have always said
that they're algorithmic,
they're always,
they're like similar to B-splines.
Michael korsan: But if you look for it,
there's an exact solution for
subdivision surfaces in SIGGRAPH98,
in the backend of it.
Somebody actually sat
down and figured it out.
So that was one of the biggest problems
of implementing subdivision surfaces.
Michael korsan: You know,
if you want to do very simple demos,
bilinear surfaces are easy,
basiar surfaces you can put the basis
functions on the vertex program,
and NURBS get a little more complicated.
Michael korsan: Like I said,
it uses recursion, but basiar are simple.
So let's do a wrap-up.
So Vertex Program,
they're a powerful tool
for shading and lighting.
You can use custom lighting models
outside the OpenGL lighting model.
You can add additional complexity to
your geometries using Vertex Programs.
And also you can actually go
to a lot finer level of detail.
I mean if you look at some
of the games out there today,
the level of detail is horrific.
You can use UV meshes
to define most surfaces.
And once a UV mesh is defined,
you can load it in VRAM and it'll
never go across the AGP bus again.
and Michael Larson,
who is the executive director of
the OpenGL Graphics Processing Unit.
Michael Larson: Thank you, Michael.
I'm going to go ahead and
turn it over to Michael.
So where do you start?
Start with Shader Builder.
Start with simple transforms, you know,
play with the scale,
play with the position,
move those things around,
change the color,
get a feeling for how the language works.
and move on to lighting models.
I actually skipped the lighting models,
I wanted to write the services,
but that's just the way I am.
And then move on to simple UV meshes.
Try implicit surface models,
come up with your crazy
cool math thingies,
and then start exploring B-splines
and NURBS and everything else.
So, more information on
the Arb Vertex Program.
You can read the spec.
It's 60 pages long and very detailed.
Lots of information in there.
It gives you kind of a guideline
of what things are supposed to do.
Or you can use Shader Builder.
I'm going to try and have these
posted in the next couple weeks.
Hopefully.
. Yeah.
Yeah.
And then,
or through the Mac OpenGL mailing list.
Now I'd like to do a quick
twirl through the roadmap here.
We have planned for
the remaining sessions,
talking about OpenGL and also the
graphics technology in MacOSX.
on Wednesday obviously.
So what we have remaining for
you tomorrow in the OpenGL track
is essentially fragment
programming with OpenGL.
This is the sort of more pixel-specific
companion to programmability.
It's also going to be
a really cool session,
lots of interesting demos.
So if you're interested
in programmability,
unlocking the power of the GPU,
you should also attend that session.
We also have,
obviously we're going to talk tomorrow
about our course 2D technology,
which is also relevant
for OpenGL developers,
'cause one of the things we announced
in our graphics and imaging overview
session yesterday is the ability
to use 2D drawing API to draw
directly into an OpenGL context.
That can also be very exciting
for OpenGL developers,
'cause it can make things like doing
high-quality text in OpenGL very easy.
Then we have a great session that if
you're doing any OpenGL development,
you have to attend session 209,
which is the OpenGL optimizations.
One thing that I've realized in
working with a lot of developers who
are using OpenGL is in many cases,
they're leaving performance
on the floor on the platform.
And it's in many cases we have a great
tool set and this session will provide
a lot of information for you to learn
how to take a look at your applications
and figure out how to unlock the true
performance potential of both the GPUs
and also the Macintoshes of the platform.
And then another thing that might
be interesting is session 211,
which is going to be on Friday,
which is introduction to Quartz Services.
Now this is a non-drawing API in Quartz,
but one of the things it does that's very
important is it manages the displays.
So a lot of OpenGL developers
have need to find out what the
configuration of the display is,
what display modes available
on the particular display are.
And this is the core APIs that we
really want developers to adopt
and use in their applications.
To do things such as screen capture
and display reconfiguration.
So you should attend that.
And then also we have
our hardware partners,
ATI, are here this year.
And then session 212,
which is also on Friday,
they're going to sort of push the
envelope and show what you can do with
their latest generation of GPU hardware
and also programmable features.
Because their demo team is going
to essentially show what they do to
create their incredibly captivating
demonstrations that they do.
Thank you.
To support their announcements
of their hardware.
So it's going to be a
really cool session.
And it's going to leverage a lot
of what you've learned today and
tomorrow in fragment programming
with fragment programming
session and vertex programming.
And then, obviously we have a
feedback forum on Friday,
our traditional spot,
the last feedback forum.
But we urge you to come back,
come to the feedback forum and
let us know what sort of things
you want to see in MacOSX from
a technology perspective.
Because a lot of the feedback we get
at WWC is what we take back and start
working from to figure out what goes
in the next major release of MacOSX.
So I think we have a QA,
or we have contact information.
If you have questions
about what you've learned,
you can contact Michael Larsen,
who is the presenter today.
And if you have other questions,
Jeff Stahl is very active
with developers directly,
and you can also use him as
a contact reference point.
I'd also like to add
my name to this list,
if you had questions about this
session or any of the graphics
technologies on MacOSX,
you can feel free to contact me,
Travis Brown, at Travis@apple.com.
Thank you.
So we have some additional information.
These are essentially where the
R Vertex programming spec can be found.
And I'll leave this up
here for a little bit.
And what I'm actually going
to do is I'm going to go ahead
and invite the Q&A team up,
the OpenGL engineering
team up to the stage.
And we'll actually engage
in a question and answer.
And I'll leave this up here.
So if you want to copy
information down off this,
you'll have plenty of time.
Okay, so we have some microphones
in the center right here.
If you have any questions
about what you've seen today,
please feel free to go to microphone.
You know,
basically announce your name and your
company and we'll field your question.